..
      Copyright 2021-2023 Intel Corporation
      SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

=====================
p4rt-ctl Client Guide
=====================

This document describes how to use P4 Control Plane executables to support
P4 programs.

Prerequisites
-------------

Before using tdi_pipeline_builder and p4rt-ctl, you need the artifacts
generated when a P4 program is compiled.

P4 build artifacts for sample.p4:

* sample.conf
* p4info.txt
* bf-rt.json
* pipe/context.json
* pipe/sample.spec


The P4 compiler (P4C) backend supports both PSA and PNA architectures. The
compiler emits the pipeline name based on the architecture used in the P4
program:

* For the PNA architecture, P4C emits the PIPELINE name as "pipe" regardless
  of the name specified in the P4 program.
* For the PSA architecture, P4C emits the PIPELINE name specified in the P4
  program. Currently it supports only ingress pipelines.

The pipeline name is referenced as:

* p4_pipeline_name in /usr/share/stratum/target_skip_p4_no_bsp.conf
* p4_pipeline_name in the sample.conf file

Networking recipe assumes pipeline name is defaulted to "pipe".
If the P4 program is defined for PSA architecture and uses a pipeline name
other than "pipe", we need to manually change the 'pipeline name' at all the
above places to the ingress pipeline name specified in the p4 file.

To avoid this handcrafting, we recommend using the ingress pipeline name as
"pipe" for all PSA programs.

tdi_pipeline_builder
--------------------

tdi_pipeline_builder is an executable generated when P4 Control Plane is
built. It is used to generate a protobuf-based bin file. This pb.bin
contains information of bfrt-config, context and config which are extracted
from sample.conf which is generated via the P4 compiler.

To generate pb.bin:

.. code-block:: bash

   tdi_pipeline_builder --p4c_conf_file=<path-to-input-sample-file.conf> \
       --bf_pipeline_config_binary_file=<path-to-output-file.pb.bin>

For example,

.. code-block:: bash

   tdi_pipeline_builder --p4c_conf_file=/home/mydir/sample.conf \
       --bf_pipeline_config_binary_file=/home/mydir/sample.pb.bin

.. important::

   You need to execute this command from the parent directory of
   relative paths mentioned in bfrt-config/context/config parameters
   of sample.conf


p4rt-ctl
--------

``p4rt-ctl`` is an executable generated when P4 Control Plane is built. It
connects to the P4Runtime server in ``infrap4d`` via gRPC for
enabling P4Runtime capabilities.

Each CLI command connects to gRPC ports opened by server and sends a protobuf based
message. Refer to p4runtime.proto for more details on type of messages and
services that are available for a p4runtime client.

For information on security and enabling TLS on gRPC ports, refer to
guides/security-guide.md

Syntax
~~~~~~

.. code-block:: text

   Usage: p4rt-ctl [OPTIONS] COMMAND [ARG...]

   positional arguments:
     command               Subcommand to run

   optional arguments:
     -h, --help            show this help message and exit
     -g, --grpc_addr       GRPC_ADDR P4Runtime gRPC server address
                           format: <server IP>:<port>

Arguments
~~~~~~~~~

* ``-g GRCP_ADDR`` specifies the address of the P4Rtuntime server, in the
  format *<server IP>:<port>*. This is an optional parameter. The default value
  is 127.0.0.1:9559. If the P4Runtime server is not running locally, you can
  specify the address using this option.

  For example, if the server is listening on 5.5.5.5:9559, the command to
  set the pipeline will be

  .. code-block:: bash

     p4rt-ctl -g 5.5.5.5:9559 set-pipe sample.pb.bin p4Info.txt

Using p4rt-ctl
--------------

Set forwarding pipeline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl set-pipe SWITCH PROGRAM P4INFO

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``PROGRAM``: Binary file generated by tdi_pipeline_builder.
* ``P4INFO``: P4Info.txt file generated by the P4 compiler.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl set-pipe br0 <path>/sample.pb.bin <path>/p4info.txt

Get forwarding pipeline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl get-pipe SWITCH

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl set-pipe br0

Add table entry (rule) to forwarding pipeline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl add-entry SWITCH TABLE FLOW

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``TABLE``: table_name present in the p4info.txt file.
* ``FLOW``: Parameters for the TABLE entry.
  Format: match_field_key=value action=action_name(value).

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

  p4rt-ctl add-entry br0 ipv4_host "dst_ip=1.1.1.1,action=send(10)"

Delete table entry (rule) from forwarding pipeline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl del-entry SWITCH TABLE KEY

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``TABLE``: table_name present in p4info.txt file.
* ``KEY``: match_field_key parameter in TABLE. Format: match_field_key=value.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl del-entry br0 ipv4_host "dst_ip=1.1.1.1"

Set default table entry in forwarding pipeline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl set-default-entry SWITCH TABLE ACTION

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``TABLE``: Name of a table present in the p4info.txt file.
* ``ACTION``: Action parameter for TABLE. Format: action_name(value).

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl set-default-entry br0 ipv4_host "send(10)"

Add action profile member to action selector table
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   add-action-profile-member SWITCH ACTION_PROFILE FLOW

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``ACTION_PROFILE``: Action profile name from the p4 file.
* ``FLOW``: Action for the table to which ACTION_PROFILE refers.
  Format: "action=action_name(value),member_id=<number>".

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl add-action-profile-member br0 ingress.as_sl3
            "action=ingress.send(0),member_id=1"

Delete action profile member from action selector table
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

    p4rt-ctl delete-action-profile-member SWITCH ACTION_PROFILE FLOW

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``ACTION_PROFILE``: Action profile name from the p4 file.
* ``FLOW``: Member ID specified when entry was added to profile.
  Format: "member_id=<number>".

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl delete-action-profile-member br0 ingress.as_sl3 "member_id=1"

Get action profile member details for action selector table
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl get-action-profile-member SWITCH ACTION_PROFILE FLOW

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``ACTION_PROFILE``: Action profile name from the p4 file.
* ``FLOW``: Member ID specified when entry was added to profile.
  Format: "member_id=<number>".

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl get-action-profile-member br0 ingress.as_sl3 "member_id=1"

Add action profile group entry to action selector table
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl add-action-profile-group SWITCH ACTION_PROFILE FLOW

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``ACTION_PROFILE``: Action profile name from the p4 file.
* ``FLOW``: Maps group with list of members.
  Format: "group_id=<group number>,reference_members=<member1,member2,..>,max_size=<maxsize of members this group can have>"

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl add-action-profile-group br0 ingress.as_sl3 "group_id=1,reference_members=(1),max_size=128"

Delete action profile group entry from action selector table
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl delete-action-profile-group SWITCH ACTION_PROFILE FLOW

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``ACTION_PROFILE``: Action profile name from the p4 file.
* ``FLOW``: Group ID specified when entry was added to table.
  Format: "group_id=<number>".

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl delete-action-profile-group br0 ingress.as_sl3 "group_id=1"

Get action profile group details for action selector table
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl get-action-profile-group SWITCH ACTION_PROFILE FLOW

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``ACTION_PROFILE``: Action profile name from the p4 file.
* ``FLOW``: Group ID specified when entry was added to table.
  Format: "group_id=<number>".

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl get-action-profile-group br0 ingress.as_sl3 "group_id=1"

Add rule for ternary match_type
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl add-entry SWITCH TABLE FLOW

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``TABLE``: table_name present in p4info.txt file.
* ``FLOW``: Parameters for TABLE entry. Since we
  are programming a match_type ternary, we expect user to provide priority
  as well. 'priority' is a case sensitive field expected from user.
  Mask for ternary or WCM match field is expected in x.x.x.x format for IPv4,
  or a decimal or hexadecimal value.
  Format: "match_field_key=value,priority=value,action=action_name(value)".

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl add-entry br0 filter "src_ip=192.168.15.0/255.255.255.0,priority=100,action=drop"

Delete rule for ternary match_type
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl del-entry SWITCH TABLE KEY

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``TABLE``: table_name present in p4info.txt file.
* ``KEY``: match_field_key parameters specified when entry was added to
  TABLE. Since match_type is ternary, we expect user to
  provide previously configured priority as well. 'priority' is a case
  sensitive field expected from user. Mask for ternary or WCM match field
  is expected in x.x.x.x format for IPv4, or a decimal or hexadecimal value.
  Format: "match_field_key=value,priority=value".

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl del-entry br0 ingress.ipv4_wcm "hdr.ipv4.dst_addr=192.168.1.0/255.255.255.0,priority=10"

Get indirect counter value
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl get-counter SWITCH COUNTER_TABLE COUNTER_FLOW

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``COUNTER_TABLE``: Specifies counter table entry from the p4 file.
* ``COUNTER_FLOW``: Counter ID (generated ID by p4c; see bfrt.json file)
  and counter table index. Format: "counter_id=<number>,index=<number>".
  counter_id=0 will display value for all counters added up. For index=UNSET,
  all cells for specified counter_id will be displayed.

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl get-counter br0 ingress.ipv4_host_counter "counter_id=308545543,index=1"

   p4rt-ctl get-counter br0 ingress.ipv4_host_counter "counter_id=0,index=1"

Reset indirect counter value
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl reset-counter SWITCH COUNTER_TABLE COUNTER_FLOW

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``COUNTER_TABLE``: counter table entry from the p4 file.
* ``COUNTER_FLOW``: counter ID (generated ID by p4c;  see bfrt.json file)
  and counter table index. Format: "counter_id=<number>,index=<number>".

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl reset-counter br0 ingress.ipv4_host_counter "counter_id=308545543,index=1"

Get direct counter value
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl get-direct-counter SWITCH TABLE KEY

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``TABLE``: table_name present in p4info.txt file.
* ``KEY``: match_field_key parameter of the TABLE.
  Format: match_field_key=value.

Examples:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl get-direct-counter br0 my_control.e_fwd "hdrs.mac[vmeta.common.depth].da="0x000000000461",hdrs.mac[vmeta.common.depth].sa="0x9ebace98d9d3"" // Egress(Tx)

   p4rt-ctl get-direct-counter br0 my_control.i_fwd "hdrs.mac[vmeta.common.depth].da="0x000000000361",hdrs.mac[vmeta.common.depth].sa="0x9ebace98d9d3"" // Ingress(Rx)

Get flow dump entries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl dump-entries SWITCH [TABLE]

Arguments:

* ``SWITCH``: Bridge name. Maps internally to device name.
* ``TABLE``: Table entry from the p4 file.

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

   p4rt-ctl dump-entries br0

Known Issues
------------

1. SWITCH parameter specified in ``p4rt-ctl`` commands is not utilized
   in current releases. It accepts any kind of value.

2. counter_id=0 in ``p4rt-ctl get-counter`` for indirect counters
   is not supported in current release. Flow counters index=unset or index=0
   does not give cumulative byte count.

3. Runtime validation of ``value`` for each key in ``p4rt-ctl`` is not supported.
